Pampanga Governor Dennis Pineda says there are discrepancies between the test results of private and government medical facilities

ADVERTISEMENT

Governor Dennis Pineda raised questions over the accuracy of coronavirus tests conducted by private medical facilities here after finding discrepancies in the results of several previously tested patients.

Swab tests in private facilities showed these patients were positive for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19 disease. However, when they were re-tested after 2 to 4 days in provincial facilities, some yielded negative results.

In a press statement sent to Rappler on Thursday afternoon, August 27, Pampanga Provincial Disaster Risk Reduction and Management officer Angelina Blanco said Pineda requested the Provincial Board to conduct an inquiry into the integrity of Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests.

Pineda said that he required a batch of 23 asymptomatic COVID-19 patients to be re-swabbed and found out that 14 of them did not have the coronavirus.

He asked the re-swabbing of another batch of 15 patients and only 3 of them turned up positive.

In a video message to his constituents posted on the provincial government’s Facebook page, the governor explained the problem.

“Lahat po ng mga nagpa-positive na napupunta sa ating COVID-19 centers ay nire-reswab ko po. Coming from private laboratories, pupunta po sa atin, nire-reswab ko. So nagkaroon ho ako ng problema dahil may mga instances na in a matter of 2 days, 3 days, 4 days mula nung a-test sila, nire-swab ko, from detected to not detected, from positive to negative,” he said.

ADVERTISEMENT

(All those who tested positive proceed to our COVID-19 center and I order that they be re-tested... The problem is there are many instances that in a matter of 2 to 4 days since they tested positive, the re-test says they are negative.)

He said the provincial government is in a quandary over what to do with patients who had conflicting RT-PCR test results.

“Dapat ba natin silang i-hold sa facilities natin? Alin po ba ang paniniwalaan ko, yung positive ba o yung negative? Marami pong tanong. (Do we keep them in the facilities? What do we believe, the positive or the negative result? There are so many questions.)" Pineda said.

He said that it would be unfair for a person who is not really infected to be inside COVID-19 facilities and be exposed to those who have actually contracted the disease.

Pineda also questioned methods of testing of the private laboratories.

“What process are these laboratories using in testing? Are they testing one sample at a time? Do these follow protocols? Are their machines in good shape? Are the results reliable? We would like to know because the Pampanga COVID-19 Center would like to help our patients in the most appropriate manner,” he said.